Astro 2.1 blog post (#563)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-210.mdx

---
title: "Astro 2.1 Release"
description: "Introducing core image support • Markdoc integration • Watch mode for astro check • getStaticPaths() TypeScript helpers"
publishDate: "March 8, 2023"
authors:
  - matthew
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-210/blog-hero-2_1-release.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-210/og-image-2_1-release.jpg"
lang: "en"
---

import markdoc from "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-210/markdoc.webp"
import astrocheckwatch from "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-210/astro-check-watch.webp"

import BlogContentImage from "/src/components/BlogContentImage.astro"

We just released Astro 2.1, featuring:

> - **[Image optimizations in core](#image-support-in-astro-core)**: An experimental feature that brings the learnings from `@astrojs/image` to core.

Reviewer: Thoughts on "Built-in Image Support" vs. "Image Optimizations in core"? I think that reads a bit better.

"Built-in Image Optimization" or "Built-in Image Improvements" could also work.

Also, thoughts on adding `(experimental)` to the bolded title, so that it's more clear that this is experimental? 

```suggestion
- **[Image optimizations in core](#image-support-in-astro-core)**: An experimental feature that brings the learnings from `@astrojs/image` to core.
+ **[Built-in Image Support (experimental)](#built-in-image-support)**: The best parts of `@astrojs/image` are now in Astro core
```

- **[Markdoc integration](#markdoc-integration)**: Markdoc is a new authoring format from Stripe that is optimized to scale to large codebases.

> - **[Watch flag for astro check](#watch-mode-in-astro-check)**: Use this flag to type check your `.astro` files during development.

Reviewer: Thoughts on renaming this title to `astro check --watch` or `'--watch' support for 'astro check'`?

### Content Collections usage

A new `image()` helper is used to define a property on your schema as being an image. Provided that the image is in the `src/assets/` folder, it will be automatically checked for you.

```ts
import { image, defineCollection, z } from "astro:content"

const blogCollection = defineCollection({
	schema: z.object({
		title: z.string(),
		cover: image().refine((img) => img.width === 600, {
			message: "Cover needs to be 600 pixels wide!",
		}),
	}),
})

export const collections = {
	blog: blogCollection,
}
```

And then provide this property in any of your items in the collection:

```md
---
title: Penguins are cool
image: emperor-penguin.png
---

# Migration patterns of emperor penguins

Post here...
```

Using this schema is a great way to ensure that your images in a collection are all of the same dimensions.

## Markdoc integration

<BlogContentImage src={markdoc} alt="The logo for the Markdoc project" />

> As we look for ways to scale Astro sites to hundreds of thousands of pages we are continuously looking for ways to make our build times faster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we look for ways to scale Astro sites to hundreds of thousands of pages, we are continuously looking for ways to make our build times faster.
```

> As we look for ways to scale Astro sites to hundreds of thousands of pages, we are continuously looking for ways to make our build times faster.

Reviewer: for an announcement post like this, I think it's better to get right to the info in the next paragraph. Either remove this, or merge it into the content below somehow

[Markdoc](https://markdoc.dev/) is a promising new format by Stripe that was purpose-built to scale to larger sites. Markdoc is a format that builds on top of Markdown, allowing you to build interactive content pages without sacrificing performance.

> Markdoc achieves this by having a declarative approach. This forces a separation between code and content, which sacrifices power and flexibility for performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is driven by [Markdoc's separation of content from code](https://markdoc.dev/docs/faq#why-not-mdx), offering huge wins for rendering speed, maintainability, and reusability.
```

Wasn't sure about saying "sacrifices" here; made the sentence read as a critique instead of an endorsement. Updated to summarize Markdoc's value add a bit better with a link to their own MDX vs. Markdoc comparison

> As part of the `@astrojs/markdoc integration`, we built a performance benchmark to compare Markdoc build performance at scale against our existing content formats: Markdown and MDX. These tests show exciting improvements, with **up to 3x faster builds** over MDX rendering static content and islands of interactivity. You can find full benchmark details and findings [on our Markdoc RFC.](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/508)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As part of the `@astrojs/markdoc integration`, we built a performance benchmark to compare Markdoc build performance at scale against our existing content formats: Markdown and MDX. These tests show exciting improvements, with **up to 3x faster builds** over MDX rendering static content and islands of interactivity. You can find full benchmark details and findings [on our Markdoc RFC.](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/508#issuecomment-1458762554)
```
updated to link directly to comment!

> As part of the `@astrojs/markdoc integration`, we built a performance benchmark to compare Markdoc build performance at scale against our existing content formats, Markdown and MDX. In our benchmarking, we have seen up to a 3x improvement over MDX rendering static content with islands of interactivity. The results, along with a complete explanation of the findings can be found [here](https://gist.github.com/bholmesdev/07ec840d0bcdc24c0114268e16b2d0b0).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As part of the `@astrojs/markdoc integration`, we built a performance benchmark to compare Markdoc build performance at scale against our existing content formats: Markdown and MDX. These tests show exciting improvements, with **up to 3x faster builds** over MDX rendering static content and islands of interactivity. You can find full benchmark details and findings [on our Markdoc RFC.](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/508)
```

Tweaked to highlight how exciting this metrics are, and updated the link to point to our RFC instead of a personal gist. Posting there shortly!

> Markdoc support can be brought into your project by installing our new integration:
> 
> ```shell
> npm install @astrojs/markdoc

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can add the Markdoc integration to your Astro projects today using the `astro add` command:

```shell
npx astro add markdoc
```
nit: point to astro add

```

> Markdoc is only available to use through [Content Collections](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/) by adding files with an `.mdoc` file extension. You can mix Markdoc files alongside your other content (Markdown and MDX), so you can do a gradual migration, or just try out the format on a few of your pages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once installed, Markdoc is available exclusively through [Content Collections](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/) using the `.mdoc` file extension. You can mix Markdoc files alongside your other content (Markdown and MDX), so you can do a gradual migration, or just try out the format on a few of your pages.
```
nit: Change phrasing from "only" to "exclusively" to sound a bit more positive
